
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/363155/Manueline

Manueline, Portuguese Manuelino,   particularly rich and lavish style of architectural ornamentation indigenous to Portugal in the early 16th century. Although the Manueline style actually continued for some time after the death of Manuel I (reigned 1495–1521), it is the prosperity of his reign that the style celebrates.

Portuguese wealth was dependent upon sea trade, and the vocabulary of Manueline decoration is decidedly nautical. When not made to resemble coral itself, moldings were encrusted with carved barnacles or covered with carved seaweed and algae. Stone ropes and cables form architectural string courses, and above the windows and doors heraldic shields, crosses, anchors, navigational instruments, and buoys are massed together in profusion. Contemporary ship accoutrements were turned into architectural motifs. Such vast building complexes as the church and convent of the Knights of Christ (original building, 12th century; rebuilt c. 1510–14) at Tomar or the Unfinished Chapels in the complex at Batalha are excellent examples of this unique style that existed for a few decades in the interval between the Gothic and the later High Renaissance and Mannerist domination of the arts in Portugal.

The profusion of dense ornament in Manueline architecture owes some debt to the contemporary Spanish, to the Flamboyant Gothic style of northern Europe, and to a revival of Moorish style.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bel%C3%A9m_Tower

Origin  c. 1513
 - Initiated    c. 1515
 - Completion   1519
Owner   Portuguese Republic

Belém Tower (in Portuguese Torre de Belém, pronounced: [ˈtoʁ(ɨ) dɨ bɨˈlɐ̃ȷ̃]) or the Tower of St Vincent[1] is a fortified tower located in the civil parish of Santa Maria de Belém in the municipality of Lisbon, Portugal. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site (along with the nearby Jerónimos Monastery)[2] because of the significant role it played in the Portuguese maritime discoveries of the era of the Age of Discoveries.[3] The tower was commissioned by King John II to be part of a defense system at the mouth of the Tagus River and a ceremonial gateway to Lisbon.[3]

The tower was built in the early 16th century and is a prominent example of the Portuguese Manueline style,[4] but it also incorporates hints of other architectural styles.[5] The structure was built from lioz limestone and is composed of a bastion and the 30 m (100 foot),[1] four storey tower. It has incorrectly been stated that the tower was built in the middle of the Tagus and now sits near the shore because the river was redirected after the 1755 Lisbon earthquake. In fact, the tower was built on a small island in the Tagus River near the Lisbon shore.[5][6]


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azulejo

Azulejo (Portuguese: [ɐzuˈleʒu], Spanish: [aθuˈlexo]) from the Arabic word Zellige زليج is a form of Portuguese painted, tin-glazed, ceramic tilework. It has become a typical aspect of Portuguese culture, having been produced without interruption for five centuries.

In Portugal, azulejos are found on the interior and exterior of churches, palaces, ordinary houses and even railway stations or subway stations. They constitute a major aspect of Portuguese architecture as they are applied on walls, floors and even ceilings. They were not only used as an ornamental art form, but also had a specific functional capacity like temperature control at homes. Many azulejos chronicle major historical and cultural aspects of Portuguese history.

15th century

Andalusian traditional house with azulejos alicatados
The art was introduced to Portugal, by the Moors and the craft is still in use in the Arab world in two main traditions the "Egyptian Zalij" and the "Moroccan Zalij" the latter being the most famous. The word azulejo is derived from the Arabic word الزليج (al zulayj): zellige, meaning "polished stone". This origin explains the unmistakable Arab influences in many tiles: interlocking curvilinear, geometric or floral motifs. The Spanish city of Seville had become the major centre of the Hispano-Moresque tile industry, employing the old techniques of cuerda seca ('dry string') and cuenca.

Cuenca tiles with the Portuguese armillary sphere in the Sintra National Palace (15th century)
The earliest azulejos in the 15th century were dry-string tiles (cuerda seca) and azulejos alicatados (panels of tile-mosaic) in Moorish tradition, imported from Seville by king Manuel I after a visit to that town in 1503. They were glazed in a single colour and decorated with geometric patterns. They were applied on walls and used for paving floors, such as can be seen in several rooms, and especially the Arab Room of the Sintra National Palace (including the famous cuenca tiles with the armillary sphere, symbol of king Manuel I). The Portuguese adopted the Moorish tradition of horror vacui ('fear of empty spaces') and covered the walls completely with azulejos.


