

Celestial navigation
In the thirteenth century celestial navigation was already known, guided by the sun position. For celestial navigation the Portuguese, like other Europeans, used Arab navigation tools, like the astrolabe and quadrant, which they made easier and simpler. They also created the cross-staff, or cane of Jacob, for measuring at sea the height of the sun and other stars. The Southern Cross become a reference upon arrival at the Southern hemisphere by João de Santarém and Pedro Escobar in 1471, starting the celestial navigation on this constellation. But the results varied throughout the year, which required corrections.
To this the Portuguese used the astronomical tables (Ephemeris), precious tools for oceanic navigation, which have experienced a remarkable diffusion in the fifteenth century. These tables revolutionized navigation, allowing to calculate latitude. The tables of the Almanach Perpetuum, by astronomer Abraham Zacuto, published in Leiria in 1496, were used along with its improved astrolabe, by Vasco da Gama and Pedro Alvares Cabral.

Cartography
It is thought that Jehuda Cresques, son of the Catalan cartographer Abraham Cresques have been one of the notable cartographers at the service of Prince Henry. However the oldest signed Portuguese sea chart is a Portolan made by Pedro Reinel in 1485 representing the Western Europe and parts of Africa, reflecting the explorations made by Diogo Cão. Reinel was also author of the first nautical chart known with an indication of latitudes in 1504 and the first representation of an Wind rose.
With his son, cartographer Jorge Reinel and Lopo Homem, they participated in the making of the atlas known as "Lopo Homem-Reinés Atlas" or "Miller Atlas", in 1519. They were considered the best cartographers of their time, with Emperor Charles V wanting them to work for him. In 1517 King Manuel I of Portugal handed Lopo Homem a charter giving him the privilege to certify and amend all compass needles in vessels.

--------------------------

http://wiki.answers.com/Q/What_navigational_tool_did_Ferdinand_Magellan_use

The navigational instruments used by Magellan's Armada de Molucca are listed in the book of F.H.H. Guillemard is in the book, ''The Life of Ferdinand Magellan and the First Circumnavigation of the Globe 1480-1521''. London: 1890, Pages 329-336. (Click http://www.archive.org/details/lifeofferdinandm90guil) 

The list includes: 

1) 7 charts constructed by the orders of Ruy Falero 
2) 11 charts made by Nuno Garcia by order of Magellan 
3) 6 charts ordered by Falero and 1 sent to the King 
4) 6 wooden quadrant made by Falero 
5) 1 wooden quadrant by Falero 
6) 1 planisphere ordered by Magellan for the King 
7) 6 metal astrolabes with rulers 
8) 15 compass needles 
9) 15 wooden quadrants, bronze-fitted 
10) Leather case for planisphere 
12) 12 hour glasses 
13) 6 pairs of compasses 
14) 2 more compass needles 
15) 4 large boxes for compasses 
16) 16 more compass needles sent by Benaldino del Castillo 
17) 6 hour glasses 

Guillemard's list was based on what is found in Martin Fernandez de Navarette's 'Colección de los viages y descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los españoles desde, fines del siglo XV, con varios documentos inéditos concernientes á la historia de la marina castellana y de los establecimientos españoles en Indias, Tomo IV', click http://www.archive.org/details/coleccibonviages04navarich. It's found on Page 8. 

VICENTE CALIBO DE JESUS 
ginesdemafra@gmail.com
