
Alcochete, May 31, 1469 – December 13, 1521 in Lisbon
Ten years older than Magellan
"The king always loathed [Magellan]". -- Barros
	Nobody knows exactly why. -- Moris

Properties:
	The Ribeira Palace (Portuguese: Paço(s) da Ribeira) on the Tagus River
		Built by Manuel in ~1500
		
	loves architecture
	multiple wives
	lots of children
	residence:

Motivation for Magellan-loathing:
	paranoia; the king felt weak and feared anyone else appearing strong
		Magellan had always been bold (to a fault) in front of Manuel, and Manuel hated him for it
	failing health
	unhappy with his ungrateful son

During his reign important maritime expansion was occuring, creating a huge overseas empire
He spent his enormous wealth on...
	...architecture, so much so that the maritime-flavored style he favored is called "Manueline"

Wife died March 17

By 1517 had entered into the throes of a personal crisis.
He believed he was nearing the end of his reign; his adored wife had recently died in childbirth,
and he decided to abdicate in favor of his son (João). But the young man proved ungrateful,
Manuel adruptly changed his mind, decided to remain on the throne, and arranged to marry his son's
fiance Leonor, the 21-year-old sister of King Charles of Spain. All the while, it was rumored, she
continued to have relations with the boy, Prince Joao, a situation that caused no end of scandal
and derision at court. So the Portuguese sovereign whom Magellan petitioned with his ambitious
plan was a deeply suspicious, unhappy, and conflicted man -- a man determined to keep others from
attaining fame and power.
	-- Bergreen p.22-23


Hollywood Jews will love this:

In December 1496, it was decreed that any Jew who did not convert to Christianity would be expelled from the country. However, those expelled could only leave the country in ships specified by the king. When those who chose expulsion arrived at the port in Lisbon, they were met by clerics and soldiers who used force, coercion, and promises in order to baptize them and prevent them from leaving the country. This period of time technically ended the presence of Jews in Portugal. Afterwards, all converted Jews and their descendants would be referred to as "New Christians", and they were given a grace period of thirty years in which no inquiries into their faith would be allowed; this was later extended to end in 1534.
A popular riot in 1504 ended in the death of two thousand Jews; the leaders of the riot were executed by Manuel.
Isabella died in childbirth in 1498, putting a damper on Portuguese ambitions to rule in Spain, which various rulers had harbored since the reign of King Ferdinand I (1367–1383). Manuel and Isabella's young son Miguel was for a period the heir apparent of Castile and Aragon, but his death in 1500 ended these ambitions. Manuel's next wife, Maria of Aragon, was his first wife's sister, but not the oldest surviving one. That was rather Joanna of Castile, who had issue.
In 1506 the Pope Julius II gave Manuel I a Golden Rose. Later in 1514 Pope Leo X also gave Manuel I a second Golden Rose. Manuel I became the first individual to receive more than one Golden Rose.

