
Moris:
This rajah of Mactan called Cilapulapu by Pigafetta ("Ci" meaning "the"), commander of the natives of Mactan who defeated and killed Magellan, has become a local hero.
It is commonly believed locally that Lapu Lapu himself struck the lethal blow to Magellan, and with a bolo.
	Statue used to have a bow and arrow pointed at mayor's office, but the mayors kept dying of heart attacks they changed the bow and arrow to a bolo (kampilan) [machete], pointed skyward.
	Pigafetta, who was beside Magellan when he fell, makes it clear the lethal instruments were spears and swords, and there is no evidence Lapu Lapu fought alongside his warriors.
	

Lapu Lapu and the Battle of Mactan, Robertson ed. 1, 171-77

The Philippines is a wonderful country with rich culture and history. It is home to the brave and the free. Filipinos are freedom-loving people as proven by Lapu-Lapu and other heroes. Datu Lapu-Lapu of Mactan is regarded by Filipino historians as the first hero of the Philippines.

Still have a question?
Ask it in the Biographies & Figures forum
Ask a young Filipino student who killed Ferdinand Magellan and he/she will promptly answer – “Lapu-Lapu”. Who is Lapu-Lapu? Scroll down to find out!

1.) Lapu-Lapu was born in 1491 and died in 1542 CE and was the datu or chieftain of the island of Mactan in the Visayas.
2.) Lapulapu is known as the first native of the archipelago to have resisted Spanish colonization which is why he is regarded as the first Filipino hero.
3.) On April 27, 1521, Lapu-Lapu led his Mactan warriors in a battle against Ferdinand Magellan known as the Battle of Mactan where Magellan and several of his men were killed.
4.) Lapu-Lapu was a Muslim Iranun Chieftain and was also known as "Kaliph Pulaka" or Cali Pulacu.
5.) Mariano Ponce, a Filipino propagandist used a variant name, "Kalipulako", as one of his pseudonyms
6.) The 1898 Philippine Declaration of Independence refers to Lapu-Lapu as "King Kalipulako de Maktan".
7.) The Cebuano people have erected a bronze statue in Lapu-Lapu’s honor on Mactan Island.
8.) The town of Opon In Cebu was renamed to Lapu-Lapu City in his honor.
9.) A 12 meter tall statue of Lapu-Lapu also stands in Rizal Park in Manila. This statue was created by sculptor Sajid Imao and erected in 2003.
10.) Lapu-Lapu was also depicted on the defunct one centavo coin that circulated from 1967 to 1974.
11.) The central figure in the official seal of the PNP or Philippine National Police is Lapu-Lapu.
12.) Lapu-lapu is a type of red grouper endemic to the Philippines named after Datu Lapu-Lapu.
13.) Two Filipino films, both called "Lapu-Lapu", have been made about the figure—the first in 1955 and the second in 2002.
14.) An alcoholic drink known as Chief Lapu-Lapu cocktail was named in his honor.
15.) Many Filipinos may not know that a street in the South of market neighborhood of San Francisco, California is named after Lapu-Lapu.
16.) Novelty singer Yoyoy Villame wrote a folk song entitled “Magellan” that tells a humorously distorted story of the Battle of Mactan.
17.) Some natives believe that in his final years, Lapu-Lapu did not die, but turned into a stone, and is forever guarding the seas of Mactan.  Fishermen in the island city of Mactan throw coins at a stone shaped like-man as a way of asking for permission to fish in the chieftain’s territory.

