
Ferdinand Magellan (Portuguese: Fernão de Magalhães, IPA: [fɨɾˈnɐ̃w ðɨ mɐɣɐˈʎɐ̃jʃ]; Spanish: Fernando de Magallanes, IPA: [ferˈnando ðe maɣaˈʎanes]; c. 1480 – April 27, 1521) was a Portuguese explorer. He was born in Sabrosa, in northern Portugal, and served King Charles I of Spain in search of a westward route to the "Spice Islands" (modern Maluku Islands in Indonesia).

Father: Rodrigo de Magalhaes, minor nobility. honorary title of sheriff of the port of Aveiro.
Mother: Alda de Mesquita (Mesquita meaning mosque, was a common disguise name of Jews ("New Christians") at the time); Magellan may have been Jewish (though he was raised and considered himself Christian)

Born in 1480 in the remote mountain parish of Sabrosa
Father's family had a land grant, traced lineage to 11th century French crusader De Magalhais, granted land from Duke of Burgundy

family was 4th-level Portuguese royalty (out of 5) : fidalgos entitled to a coat of arms and of noble lineage"
him and his brother became royal pages at age ~12 for Queen Leonor in Lisbon
"children educated at the royal courts of Renaissance Europe were taught reading and writing, religion, arithmetic, music and dancing, horsemanship and martial skills. In Lisbon, court pages also were taught  algebra, geometry, astronomy and navigation." -- Joyner, p.34

WHY MANUEL HATES MAGELLAN:
"At the court of Queen Leonor, pages were trained by the queen's brother, Manuel, the Duke of Beja. Cousin as well as brother-in-law to Joao II, the duke never enjoyed the king's affection or confidence. Manuel was related to the Braganza family, reivals of the House of Avis for the throne of Portugal, and the king distrusted him. After the premature death of the crown prince in 1491, Manuel became the legitimate heir to the throne, but Joao plotted to replace him in the royal succession with his illegitimate son, Jorge. The court split into 2 factions: one, including the queen, recognized Duke Manuel as the legitimate heir, while the other supported the king in his wish to be succeeded by Prince Jorge. Since the Magellan family was loyal to King Joao, Magellan's relationship with Manuel was strained from the start. The antipathy that poisoned their later relations may well have stemmed from this source." -- Joyner, p.34

"King Joao had enthusiastically resumed the policy of encouraging maritime exploration initiated by Prince Henry." -- Joyner, p.35

"In Lisbon, supercilious peers regarded the youthful [Magellan] as a country bumpkin. His resentment at their snobbery and the exciting stories of overseas discoveries heard at court combined to make young Magellan dream of winning honor and prestige with daring exploits in exotic, faraway lands." -- Joyner, p.36

"[Magellan] was probably employed at Casa da India e da Guinea, an annex of the royal palace...
 he had ready access to the privileged information stored at Casa de India, and he eagerly
 digested the new geographic concepts and navigational theories propounded by members of the 
 Junta dos Matematicos...
 From the pilots, masters and mates who sailed with the exploratory fleets, Magellan learned practical
 aspects of navigation not contained in the discourses of the savants of the Junta. By helping to
 outfit the fleets leaving for India each year, Magellan learned about rigging, caulking, repairing,
 and armaments and about procuring and loading supplies for a long voyage. The more he learned, the
 more he hungered to sail with one of the great fleets." -- Joyner, p.36

short and stout
bearded
walked with a limp
looked unimposing but possessed powerful determination

"A sailor's sailor"
Cool under pressure
Brave
Bold
Uncompromising
Stubborn
Religious, more than usual even for the time

Patterns
	"never allowed women on board the ship at sea. Before he left any port where there had been goings-on, he caused the algucail to search every nook and corner of each ship to root out girl stoaways" -- Morison p. 361
	forbade slave trading by the sailors (wanted no extra mouths to feed)

Contemporaries
	
	Henry the Navigator (Portuguese pronunciation: [ẽˈʁik(ɨ)]; Portuguese: Henrique o Navegador Porto, 4 March 1394 – 13 November 1460) was an infante of the Kingdom of Portugal and an important figure in the early days of the Portuguese Empire. He was responsible for the early development of European exploration and maritime trade with other continents.

	Afonso de Albuquerque[p][n] (or archaically spelt as Aphonso d'Albuquerque and also spelt as Affonso, Alfonso, and Alphonso; Portuguese pronunciation: [ɐˈfõsu dɨ aɫbuˈkɛɾk]; 1453 – December 16, 1515) was a Portuguese fidalgo, or nobleman, an admiral whose military and administrative activities as second governor of Portuguese India conquered and established the Portuguese colonial empire in the Indian Ocean. He is generally considered a world conquest military genius[1][2], given his successful strategy: he attempted to close all the Indian ocean naval passages to the Atlantic, Red Sea, Persian Gulf, and to the Pacific, transforming it into a Portuguese mare clausum established over the Turkish power and their Muslim and Hindu allies.[3] He was responsible for building numerous fortresses to defend key strategic positions and establishing a net of diplomatic relations. Shortly before his death he was awarded viceroy and "Duke of Goa" by king Manuel I of Portugal, becoming the first Portuguese duke not from the royal family, and the first Portuguese title landed overseas. For some time he was known as The Terrible, The Great, The Caesar of the East, Lion of the Seas and as The Portuguese Mars.

	Of all the discoverers, I think he'd relate the most to Christopher Columbus because
		he was a foreigner who sailed under a Spanish flag, just like him
		he sought to reach the East by sailing West, just like him
		he was a fervent Christian, Magellan may have read his book

	Pedro Álvares Cabral[A] (Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈpeðɾu ˈaɫvɐɾɨʃ kɐˈβɾaɫ] in European Portuguese or Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈpedɾʊ ˈaʊ̯vaɾɪs kaˈbɾaʊ̯] in Brazilian Portuguese; c. 1467 or 1468 – c. 1520) was a Portuguese noble, military commander, navigator and explorer regarded as the discoverer of Brazil. Cabral conducted the first substantial exploration of the northeast coast of South America and claimed it for Portugal. While details of Cabral's early life are sketchy, it is known that he came from a minor noble family and received a good education. He was appointed to head an expedition to India in 1500, following Vasco da Gama's newly opened route around Africa.

	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portugal_in_the_Age_of_Discovery#Chronology_of_the_Portuguese_discoveries

Portuguese rounding Africa to the Indies: Cao, Dias, de Gama

1482 - Diogo Cão reaches the Congo River, where he erects a "padrão" (pillar of stone).[4]
1488 - Bartolomeu Dias rounds the "Cape of Storms" (Cape of Good Hope).[4]
1492 - Christopher Columbus discovers the Bahamas, Cuba, and "Española" (Hispaniola).[6]
1493-94 - Columbus discovers Dominica and Guadeloupe, among other islands of the Lesser Antilles; also discovers Puerto Rico and Jamaica.[6]
1497-98 - Vasco da Gama sails to India and back.[3]
1498 - Columbus discovers the mainland of South America.[6]
1499 - Alonso de Ojeda explores the South American mainland from about Cayenne (in modern French Guiana) to Cabo de la Vela (in modern Colombia), discovering the mouths of the Orinoco and entering Lake Maracaibo.[2]
1500 - Vicente Yáñez Pinzón discovers Brazil at a cape he names "Santa Maria de la Consolación" (Cabo de Santo Agostinho) and sails fifty miles up a river he names the "Marañón" (Amazon).[2]
1500 - Pedro Álvares Cabral makes the "official" discovery of Brazil.[2]
1500 - Rodrigo de Bastidas explores the Columbian coast from Cabo de la Vela to the Gulf of Urabá.[2]
1502 - Gonçalo Coelho discovers "Rio de Janeiro" (Guanabara Bay).[2]
1506 - Tristão da Cunha discovers the island of Tristan da Cunha.[citation needed]
1509 - Diogo Lopes de Sequeira reaches Sumatra and Malacca.[9]
1511 - Duarte Fernandes leads a diplomatic mission to Ayutthaya Kingdom (Siam or Thailand).[10]
1511 - Rui Nunes da Cunha leads a diplomatic mission to Pegu (Burma or Myanmar).[10][11]
1511-12 – António de Abreu sails through the Strait of Malacca, between Sumatra and Bangka, and along the coasts of Java, Bali, Lombok, Sumbawa, and Flores to the “Spice Islands” (Maluku).[12]
1513 - Jorge Álvares lands off the coast of China, on Nei Lingding Island at the Pearl River Delta.[1]
1513 - Vasco Núñez de Balboa crosses the Isthmus of Panama and reaches the Bay of San Miguel, discovering the "Mar del Sur" (Pacific Ocean).[2]
1513 - Juan Ponce de León discovers "La Florida" (Florida) and the Yucatan.[2]
1514-15 - António Fernandes reaches present-day Zimbabwe.[13]
1515 – Gonzalo de Badajoz crosses the Isthmus of Panama at the site of Nombre de Dios, reaching as far as the interior of the Azuero Peninsula.[14]
1516 - Juan Díaz de Solís reaches the estuary of what he names "La Mar Dulce" ("The Fresh-Water Sea"; now the Río de la Plata).[2]
1516 - Portuguese traders land in Da Nang, Champa, naming it Cochinchina (modern Vietnam).[15][16]

	
	Amerigo Vespucci
	Vasco de Gama
	Vasco Núñez de Balboa (c. 1475 – around January 12-21, 1519[1]) was a Spanish explorer, governor, and conquistador. He is best known for having crossed the Isthmus of Panama to the Pacific Ocean in 1513, becoming the first European to lead an expedition to have seen or reached the Pacific from the New World.
	Juan Ponce de León y Figueroa[1] (English pronunciation: /ˈpɒns də ˈliən/[2] Spanish pronunciation: ['poNθe ðe le'on] or ['ponse ðe le'on]; 1474 – July 1521)[3] was a Spanish explorer. He became the first Governor of Puerto Rico by appointment of the Spanish crown. He led the first European expedition to Florida, which he named. He is associated with the legend of the Fountain of Youth, reputed to be in Florida.
	Hernán Cortés de Monroy y Pizarro: active in 1518-1519, but not clear how much Magellan would know about him
	Francisco Pizarro: too late, first expedition in 1524

Reading: what works would Magellan be familiar with?
	Letters
	Books
		Fiction
			Greek mythology: Illiad, Odyssey, mythology?
			Roman mythology?
			Christian Bible
			Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur (Le Morte Darthur, Middle French for "the death of Arthur") is a compilation of Romance tales about the legendary King Arthur, Guinevere, Lancelot, and the Knights of the Round Table. (Translated in Portuguese)
			Chrétien de Troyes' Le Chevalier de la Charette, or "Lancelot, the Knight of the Cart" (12th century)
			Myth of Prester John
			Guillaume de Lorris' Roman de la rose (1230)
			Sir Gawain and the Green Knight is a late 14th-century Middle English alliterative romance outlining an adventure of Sir Gawain, a knight of King Arthur's Round Table.
			Gottfried von Strassburg (died c. 1210) is the author of the Middle High German courtly romance Tristan and Isolt, an adaptation of the 12th-century Tristan and Iseult legend
			Wolfram von Eschenbach's Parzival and the Nibelungenlied
		Non-fiction
			Giovanni da Pian del Carpine's Ystoria Mongalorum (1240) : report of his trip to the Mongol Empire, the oldest European account of the Mongols. 
			Marco Polo's Travels (1296)
			Christopher Columbus's
				The Book of Privileges (El Libro de los Privilegios) (1502)
				The Book of Prophecies (El Libro de las Profecías) (1501-1505)
			Amerigo Vespucci's
				Mundus Novus (late 1502 / early 1503) and soon reprinted and distributed in numerous European countries.
				German Martin Waldseemüller in 1507 in Cosmographiae Introductio, a book on cosmography and geography, as Quattuor Americi Vespuccij navigationes (Four Voyages of Amerigo Vespucci)
	Maps / Charts
		Martin Waldseemüller Universalis Cosmographia (1507)
	

Research the names he gives to everywhere, discern the meaning behind the names
	Santa Luzia
		name of Rio de Janeiro harbor because they reached in on the day of the feast of St. Lucy
	Patagonia
	Cape of the Thousand Virgins (?)
	Strait of all Saints
	San Pablo Islands
	Ilha de los Tiburones

Francisco Serrão
	writes Magellan letters from the Spice Islands

