
the Tehuelche people of Patagonia

nomadic and pastoral lifestyle
	"like Cingani (gypsies)"

"giants": tall (6+ft) vs. sailors' ~5ft

partially dressed in guanaco skins
his feet, shed in guanaco-hide bukins stuffed with straw, looked enormous, which
caused Magellan to name him patagon (big-foot) and his country patagonia

following the wild herds of guanaco which they caught using captured calves as decoys
	lived largely off guanacos, much as North American Great Plains natives lived off the buffalo

had tame guanacos
women were the beasts of burden
	"they were short and squat, with breasts hanging down half a fathom, repulsively ugly to Magellan's crews."

As nomads, Tehuelches lived with limited possessions, as they had to move across long distances. Their rock tools were usually made of obsidian or basalt, as those rocks were not hard enough as to be unmalleable, but neither soft enough as to break easily.[9] Those rocks, however, could only be found at specific regions of the Patagonia, so the Tehuelches had to make long journeys to renew their supplies.
The tehuelches hunted many species in the Patagonia, including whales, sea mammals, small rodents and sea birds; their main hunts were guanacos and Rheas. Both species were usually found at the same places, as the rheas eat the larvaes that grow at the Guanaco's manure.[10] Everything from the guanaco was exploited by the Tehuelches: the meat and blood were used for food, the fat to grease their bodies during winter, and the hide to make clothing and canopies.
There is little vegetal life in the Patagonia, but the Tehuelches gathered fruits that grew during summers. Those fruits were the only sweet foods in their diet.

Rheas have many uses in South America. Feathers are used for feather dusters, skins are used for cloaks or leather, and their meat is a staple to many people.

possible, find out:
	use whale rib bones and guanaco skins as shelter

Alakalufs and Yamanas, Tribes on Canoes
	Both tribes were nomads. They mainly lived on the sea, staying in there canoes on which they permanently kept fires burning. Their main resources were shells and fish.
Yamanas occupied South of Tierra del Fuego and the Cape Horn while Alakalufs roamed the Magellan Straits and, through the fjords, spread right up to Wellington Island where now stands Perto Den at the edge of Hielo Continental.
It is most probable that the most daring canoed across the lower parts of Hielo Continental to steal women from the Tehuelches who lived on the Eastern steppes.
The ocean part of our trajectory will cover the ancient territories of the Alakalufs.
- Read «The Nomads of the Sea» by José Emperaire or «Which remembers the men…» by Jean Raspail.

Pigafetta's initial account:
	dancing on shore
	pointing finger to sky, he believed they were from heaven
	"we only reached his waist"
	painted all over



	

