"Puerto San Julian still offers a spacious iner harbor, but a depressing aspect.
 The entrance between the hundred-foot-high gray cliffs (Cabos Curioso and Desengano)
 narrows to a half-mile-wide bottleneck.
 The tidal range is 20-25 feet and the current at the narrow entrance runs up to 6 knots.
 So, when things got sticky, Magellan found it wise to moor his flagship in the bottleneck
 so that any vessel trying to escape would have to cross his cannon range." -- Morison, p.367

There is a Nao Victoria museum in present day Puerto San Julian, Santa Cruz, Argentina
Relive Magellan’s landing at Museo Nao Victoria, a museum-cum-theme-park with life-sized figures cloaked in armor and shown celebrating Mass and battling mutiny. Reproductions of everyday items provide some interest. You can’t miss it – it’s at the port on a boat, a reproduction of the Nao Victoria.

Patagonian climate
Overall climate is cool and dry. The east coast is warmer than the west, especially in summer, as a branch of the southern equatorial current reaches its shores, whereas the west coast is washed by a cold current. However, winters are much colder on the eastern inland plateaus in Argentina, and the lowest extreme temperatures can be colder on the east coast than on the west coast. At Puerto Montt, on the inlet behind Chiloé Island. The mean annual temperature is 11 °C (52 °F) and the average extremes 25.5 °C (78 °F) and −1.5 °C (29.5 °F), whereas at Bahía Blanca near the Atlantic coast and just outside the northern confines of Patagonia the annual temperature is 15 °C (59 °F) and the range much greater, as temperatures above 35°C and below -5°C are recorded every year. At Punta Arenas, in the extreme south, the mean temperature is 6 °C (43 °F) and the average extremes 24.5 °C (76 °F) and −2 °C (28 °F). The prevailing winds are westerly, and the westward slope has a much heavier precipitation than the eastern in a rainshadow effect;[1] the western islands close to Torres del Paine receive an annual precipitation of 4,000 to 7,000 mm, whilst the eastern hills are less than 800 mm and the plains may be as low as 200 mm annual precipitation.
