1453        Constantinople fall to the Turks, severing time-honored Asia/European overland spice routes
1481 Feb  6 First auto-da-fé held in Seville: six people were burned alive. From there, the Inquisition grew rapidly in the Kingdom of Castile.
1492 Jan  2 The Reconquista ends with the end of the Grenada War; the last muslim ruler in the Iberian pensisula, Muhammad XII of Granada (King Boabdil) surrendered the Emirate of Granada.
		    Many Muslims and Jews still live in Spain.
1492        Tribunals existed in eight Castilian cities: Ávila, Córdoba, Jaén, Medina del Campo, Segovia, Sigüenza, Toledo, and Valladolid.
1492 Mar 31 Alhambra Decree (Edict of Expulsion) ordering the expulsion of Jews from the Kingdom of Spain and its territories and possessions by 31 July of that year.
1494 Jun  7?Treaty of Tordesillas by Pope Alexander VI divides trading and colonizing rights for all newly discovered lands between Spain and Portugal to the exclusion of other European nations
1495        King Manuel rules Portugal
1505 Mar    At the age of 25, Magellan enlisted in the fleet of 22 ships sent to host D. Francisco de Almeida as the first viceroy of Portuguese India. Although his name does not appear in the chronicles, it is known that he remained there eight years, in Goa, Cochin and Quilon.
1506 May 20 Columbus dies in Valladolid, Spain at age 54. Columbus' remains were first interred at Valladolid, then at the monastery of La Cartuja in Seville (southern Spain) by the will of his son Diego, who had been governor of Hispaniola. In 1898, the remains were moved back to Spain, to the Cathedral of Seville.
1506        Magellan participated in battle of Cannanore where he was wounded
1508		sailed in a fleet of four ships from Cochin on the Malabar coast to Malacca. -- Southern Voyages, Morison p316
1509        he fought in the battle of Diu[3] and later sailed under Diogo Lopes de Sequeira in the first Portuguese embassy to Malacca, with Francisco Serrão, his friend and possibly cousin.
1509 Sep    after arriving at Malacca, the expedition fell victim to a conspiracy ending in retreat. Magellan had a crucial role, warning Sequeira and saving Francisco Serrão, who had landed. This performance earned him honors and a promotion.
			Here Magellan distinguished himself by giving warning of a Malay plot to capture the ships when most of their crew was ashore, and thereby thwarting it. -- Morison
1510 Jan    2 ships of a homeward convoy from Cochin with Magellan on board, struck on the Padre shoals near the Maldive Islands. Magellan took command, sent the ships' boats with the captains and gentlemen passengers to Cannanore -- a journey of 8 days -- and himself remained in charge of the 2 wrecks with the greater part of the crews. They, but for confidence in him, would have rushed the boats to get away, or starved. During the several weeks before a rescue vessel arrived, Magellan had the wrecked hulls, shored up for safety, kept constant watch against a pirate attack, took care that rations were served out fairly and there was no pilfering of the valuable cargo. It was considered so remarkable for an officer to do that instead of saving himself that even historians who considered him a traitor to Portugal praised his courage and his men's loyalty. Magellan was always a sailor's sailor, and "os rudos marinheiros" (the rough sailors), as Camöens called the common "matlow" of that era, always stood by him in his contests with officers. -- Morison p316
1511        Governor Afonso de Albuquerque sent a fleet under Antonio d'Abreu to conquer Malacca and Magellan and Serrão participated. Malacca fell after a siege of six weeks. Here the Portuguese received breath-taking accounts of the Spice Islands (the Moluccas). Albuquerque decided without delay to reconnoiter this spicy paradise.
			Three ships were equipped: Abreu commanded Santa Catarina, Serrão the Sabaia and Magellan a caravel. With help of a local pilot they reached Ambon and Banda. Nutmegs were plentiful and Abreu loaded up and went back to Malacca. -- Morris p.317
			Serrão's vessel struct a reef and became a total loss. By a ruse he captured the vessel of some pirates who were looking for him, and in her sailed back to Ambon and on to Ternate. Thence he wrote enthusiastic letters to his friend Magellan about the amenities of the Spice Islands and the abundance of clove, cinammon and nutmeg.
		
1512        in the company of a Malay he had indentured and baptized Enrique of Malacca, returned to Portugal. Serrão departed in the first expedition sent to find the "Spice Islands" in the Moluccas, where he remained, having married a woman from Amboina and becoming a military advisor to the Sultan of Ternate, Bayan Sirrullah. His letters to Magellan would prove decisive, giving information about the spice-producing territories.
1513        King Manual launches an enormous army to enforce annual tribute from the Morrocan city of Azamor
            Magellan buys his own horse, an old one, the only one he can afford
			Portugal reclaims the city, but Magellan barely escapes with his life and his horse is killed
			The army offers a pittance for his horse and Magellan writes an angry, insulting letter directly to King Manuel requesting compensation for his horse. The letter is summarily dismissed.
			Magellan stubbornly remains at his post, acquires a new horse somehow and participates in hand-to-hand skirmishes against desert Arabs who harass the Portugese guarding Azamor
			Compare : Don Quixote
			Limp: Magellan an Arab lance smashes his kneecap, ending his career as a soldier
			Promoted to quartermaster, giving him a share of the spoils of war.
			Subsequent battle captures 200,000 Arab goats, camels, horses.
			Magellan distributes spoils, selling many of them back to their former owners and is charged.
			After taking a leave without permission, Magellan fell out of favour. Serving in Morocco he was wounded and got a permanent limp. He was also accused of trading illegally with the Moors. The accusations were proved false, but there were no further offers of employment after May 15, 1514.
1515        he got an employment offer as a crew member on a Portuguese ship, but rejected

1517?       
1517 Sep    Magellan asked Manuel "to go and live with someone who would reward his services".
			Manuel coldly replied that he could do as he pleased.
            Magellan knelt to kiss the king's hands, as custom dictated, King Manuel concealed them behind his cloak and turned his back on his petitioner
1517 Oct    Magellan arrives in Seville and signs formal papers making him a Spanish subject.
            Magellan Digio Beatriz
1518        Magellan marries Dona Beatriz, Diogo's daughter.
??????????  Pigafetta follows Pope's emissary Andrea Chiericati to Spain...
??????????  Magellan finalizes his will, leaving money and freeing Enrique (and leaving him 10k maravedis) upon his death

1518 Mar 22 King Charles letter: gives Magellan "power of rope and knife"

1519 Feb?   Magellan's wife Beatriz gives birth to a boy, Rodrigo
1519 Feb 28 Charles writes to Manuel from Barcelona to assure him the fleet is instructed to respect the Treaty of Tordesillas

1519 May  8 Final voyage instructions issued by King Charles
			includes instructions about leaving signs/letters if ships are separated
1519 May    Pigafetta arrives in Seville
			During the next several months he ingratiated himself into Magellan's trust
1519 Jun?   Manuel sends his spy Sebastian Alvares to undo Magellan's resolve
            Reports that Faleiro appears mentally unstable
1519 Jul 18 Alvares secretly reports back to Manuel(?)
1519 Jul?  Alvares continues to disuade Magellan but is ultimately impressed at his resolve
1519 Jul 26 King Charles declared Faleiro will not sail with Magellan
1519 ?      Juan de Cartagena, Fonseca's illegitimate child ("nephew"), with no experience at sea, is ordered by the king -- controversially -- as a replacement or Faleiro and fleet inspector general (chief accountant and representative of the king's treasury); at significantly higher pay (110k) than Magellan. He is essentially a spy.
1519 ?      Fonseca replaces Faleiro with Andres de San Martin, well-connected Spanish astrologer

1519 ?????? King Manuel orders the harassment of Magellan's relatives who remained in Portugal
            The family escutcheon was vandalized and destroyed; family members were stoned in public and many left the coutry; Francisco de Silva Tellez, Magellan's nephew, sought refuge in Brazil
			The Sabrosa (family) estate fell into disrepairl the stone that once held the Magellan esctcheon was covered in shit

1519 Aug  8 Casa de Contractacion summons Magellan to testify that he has made every effort to hire Spanish officers and crew members rather than foreigners.
			In fact, he had gone to great lengths...
1519 Aug  9 Officers and crew attend mass at Santa Maria de la Victoria in Triana (sailor's district)
            Sancho Martinez de Leiva as King Charles' representative, presents Magellan with the royal flag as he kneels before the Virgin (the first time a non-Castilian had been bestowed the royal colors)
			Magellan swears he is the king's faithful servant, fulfill his obligations to guarentee the expedition's success. The captains repeat the oath and swear to obey Magellan and to follow him to his route, wherever it might lead.
1519 Aug 10 Ships depart Seville, firing their artillery
		    Magellan remained behind making last minute provision arrangementsl he would join the fleet later
1519 Aug 17? Ships reach Sanlucar after navigating the Guadalquivir
			 They remain there several days while Magellan has his men attend mass at Our Lady of Barameda near Sanlucar. Magellan orders the crew to confess themselves before leaving.
1519 Aug ?  It is clear to Magellan, Pigafetta and others that his officers are hostile
            Magellan gives his captains strict orders to follow him and report to his ship daily
1519 Sep 20 Armada leaves Sanlucar for the Ocean Sea
1519 Sep 26 Armada reaches Tenerife in the Canary Islands; 3.5 days to load provisions, etc.
				water, wood, fresh meat, salt codfish from a caravel, pitch for caulking seams
            Magellan purchases privisions but is swindled by suppliers, receiving only ~1/3 of supplies
			Magellan receives a secret communique from his father-in-law Diogo Barbosa warning him the other captains will mutiny at first chance; he replies that he will do his best; Barbosa shows this to the Casa
			Magellan hears news that Manuel has dispatched 2 fleets of caravels to arrest him (Manuel's father did the same thing to Columbus)
1519 Oct  3 Depart Tenerie at midnight, in an unorthodox path along the coast of Africa to thwart the pursuing Portuguese
1519 Oct 18 A series of storms off the coast of Sierre Leone -- furious squalls interspersed with flat calms in which shoals of sharks cruised around (Morison)
            St. Elmo's fire appears on Trinidad's yardarms for 2 hours; Pigafetta says sailors were blind for 15 minutes after it went out
1519 Oct?   Fleet hits equatorial calms for 5 days; oppressive heat
1519 Oct?   Cartagena intentionally disrespects Magellan and henceforth fails to salute for several days
1519 Oct?   Antonio Salamon convicted of sodomizing a cabin boy; sentenced to death on Dec 20
            A captain's meeting is held aboard the Trinidad, Cartegena declared he would no longer take orders from Magellan, Magellan takes Cartagena prisoner, Cartagena implores other captain's to stab Magellan but they lose their nerve. Cartagena is secured to stocks on deck meant for common seamen. Magellan relieves Cartagena of duty and releases him to Mendoza aboard the Victoria.
			Antonio de Coca made captain of the San Antonio in Cartagena's stead
1519 Nov?   Finally float out of the doldrums
            Concepcion's pilot Joao Lopes Carvalho brought to the Trinidad because he had been to Brazil before and knew it better than Gomez did
			Magellan had 'Livro de Marinharia' a fairly accurate map of the Brazil coastline down to 35N
1519 Nov 29 Armada raises Cape Saint Augustine (8'20'S). Pauses to take on fresh food and water.
1519 Dec ?  Avoided Portuguese feitoria (trading post) @ Recife they passed by

1519 Dec 13 Armada passes Cape Frio and enters Bay of St. Lucy approaching Rio de Janeiro
            "Trinidad proudly led the way through the chanel, past the now famous Pao de Acucar (Sugar Loaf), and anchored further up the harbor, off the site of the city, in seven fathom. Since this was the feast day of St. Lucy, Magellan named the bay Santa Luzia after her (but Coelho and Vespucci had already entered it in Jan 1502 and named in Rio de Janeiro)." -- Morris, p.361
			Their arrival coincided with heavy rains that ended a two-month drought in the region
				"The day we arrived the rain began, so that the people said we came from heaven and had brought the rain with us" -- Pigafetta
			As the ships came to rest, throngs of naked women, eager for contact with the sojourners, swam out to greet them. Deprived of the company of women for month's, the sailors believed they had found an earthly paradaise" -- Bergreen p.101
1519 Dec 13+ Sailors enjoy 2 weeks of orgies with young naked native girls by paying their brothers with "German knives of the worst quality"
            Nightly revels were held ashore under a waning moon; more attractive girls are given nicer gifts
			One girl sneaks aboard the ship and steals an iron nail by putting it in her vagina
            Carvalho's Brazilian mistress shows up with his never-before-seen son; Carvalho signs the boy up as a criado (servant), but could not persuade Magellan to take the mother along
			Traded with playing cards for chickens, hatchets for slaves (Magellan forbade this)
1519 Dec 13+Coca releases Cartagena and other prisoners(?)
            Magellan sent Gomez de Espinosa with men-at-arms to put the mutiny down
				entrusts safe-keeping of Cartagena and Coca to Mendoza aboard the Victoria
				appoints his supernumerary cousin Alvaro de Mezquita as captain of the San Antonio
					this was a mistake, not only in passing over many other more qualified candidates, but Mezquita was not tough enough to handle the hardened men now under him
			Magellan and pilots try to calculate Rio's longitude by timing the moon and Jupiter and comparing with an alamanc; the results were worthless
				his pilots were very skilled, calculating the latitude to within 1 mile
1519 Dec 20 Execution of Antonio Salamon by strangulation (ashore?)
			Anontio Ginoves, the cabin boy involved in the sodomy, was lost overboard: conflicting acocunts on whether it was murder or suicide... and when?
1519 Dec 25 Spent off the coast of Rio
1519 Dec 26/27 Depart Rio to the sound of music and the wailing of abandoned native "brides"

1519 Dec 26+Serious search for the straight begins
1519 Dec 26+As they head south familiar northern stars (The Great Bear, Dipper) disappear below the horizon; southern stars like Southern Cross, Canopus, Formalhaut, Antares and Achenar) dominate the sky
            "Magellan sailed as close to the shore as he dared, frequently heaving the lead [http://www.thedearsurprise.com/?p=699] and investigating every big opening." -- Morison p.363 
1520 Jan  8 "Only once between Rio de Janeiro and River Plata, did the fleet anchor at night, the moon but four days full." -- Morison p.362
1520 Jan 10/11 Carvalho recognizes 3 hills @ Cabo Santa Maria (now Punta del Este, uruguay)
               rounded Isla de Lobos
               "Monte Video"
               Magellan names it Rio de Solis after the explorer murdered by natives in 1516
               Rio de la Plata was expected to be the strait;
               		the Schoner global of 1515 placed it at 35N
					both Juan de Solis and Joao de Lisboa reported it to be there
1520 Jan ?    Santiago, the lightest-draft vessel, sent up-river to look for an outlet
			  Captain Serrano found the bay narrowing and shoaling
              "found plenty of evidence that 1+ rivers  emptied into it"
              Magellan sent the longboat of each ship to make a detailed search, while the fleet anchored at Punta del Este; they found the water to be brackish and then fresh (by taste!), proving it to be a river and not an ocean
1520 Feb  2 Ships depart anchorage near Montevideo on Candlemas Day
            Magellan is convinced it can't be much further
            Magellan starts south with a full moon
1520 Feb  3?Anchors off Cabo San Antonio
1520 Feb 13 anchored off Bahia Blanca, terrific thunderstorm, the cables hold
            particularly beautiful St. Elmo's fire played upon the spars, comforting the sailors
1520 Feb 13+Magellan explores around islands of Bahia Blanca
1520 Feb 13+Magellan adopts 24-hour sailing schedule to cover the most ground on dwindling supplies, sailing 1 league from land by day and 5-6 offshore by night
1520 Feb 24 at 40'40'S Magellan disregards the south bay-within-the-bay as a dead end, which it was
            Names it Bahia sin fondo (Bottomless Bay) because his dipsey lead wouldn't reach bottom
1520 Feb 27 lay off a broad bay they called Bahia de los Patos with many penguins (penguins were called 'patos sin alas' -- wingless ducks in Europe)
            Cabo dos Bahias: Boat sent ashore to slaughter elephant seals and penguins caught in gale, which blew the rest of the fleet out to sea, stranding the men. It was so cold the men had to cover themselves with dead seals and penguins to avoid freezing to death! When the fleet returned to rescue them, they smelled horribly.
1520 Mar    For 3 weeks they made only 120 miles, battered constantly by storms and no sun.
1520 Mar ?  Bahia de los Trabajos (now Port Desire) @47'46'S
			Darwin calls it "a wretched place"
            "Storm after storm now pursued the fleet. These were the imfaous 'pamperos' line squals that blow with great ferocity off the land. Six stormy days were ridden out in a small bay" -- Morison, p.366
1520 Mar 31 Puerto San Julian
			Magellan announces to the 5 leaders the fleet would overwinter until better weather and imposes half rations
			The Captains implore Magellan to restore rations and sail home to Spain. Magellan replies he would rather die than give up his quest for the Strait.
				the king has ordered it, there was plenty of food in Puerto San Julian and they still had enough bread and wine from Spain...

1520 Apr-Aug Overwintering in Puerto San Julian
1520 Apr  1 Palm Sunday: Magellan summons officers to hear Mass ahore, invites captains to dine in the flag cabin; only his cousin Alvaro de Mezquita shows up
            That night: mutineers (captains Quesada, Mendoza and Cartagena) capture 3 ships: San Antonio, Concepcion and Victoria

1520 Apr  2 Monday of Holy Week: Quesada notifies Magellan of mutiny by longboat
            Magellan sends in Espinosa with a letter and instructions to kill if necessary, Mendoza laughs at the letter and is stabbed through the neck and head
			Duarte Barbosa is named captain of the Victoria
			That night: Quesada loses his nerve and tries to sneak Concepcion and San Antonio out...
				but crew on Concepcion loyal to Magellan cut the Concepcion's cable til she drifted within range of Trinidad
				Quesada stands on deck in full armor as Trinidad delivers a point-blank broadside and then crossbow and lance fire(!). The crew is stunned.
				Magellan has himself rowed to Concepcion and boards her and with sword drawn forces Quesada to relent
				Quesada and Coca are clapped in irons aboard Trinidad
				Espinosa rows Magellan to San Antonio; Cartagena, in armor, refuses his hail; Espinosa boards armed and captures Cartagena.
1520 Apr  3 Tuesday of Holy Week: Mendoza's body is taken ashore and quartered, he is cried throughout the fleet as a traitor
			"There followed a grim celebration of Easter Sunday" -- Morison, p.372; (?) I don't get it...
			Magellan calls a court-martial: Mendoza, Cartagena, Coca, Elcano, Quesada, Quesada's servant Molino guilty of treason and sentenced to death
				Molino spared by BEHEADING HIS OWN MASTER WITH A SWORD(!) (after asking forgiveness)
				Quesada's body was hanged on a gibbet next to Mendoza's remains
				Magellan commuted all other sentences to hard labor... a mistake in the case of Cartagena
			It is clear by this point that the men trust him (more or less), because they remain (mostly) loyal to him during the attempted mutinies

1520 Apr  ? Cartagena uses one of the chaplains, Pero Sanchez de Reina, to stir up fresh mutiny(!)
			Another court-martial finds them both guilty; but Magellan would not execute a priest nor a captain appointed by the king, so he sentenced them to be marooned.
1520 May    Sailors are kept busy...
				building barracks on shore
				hunting and fishing
				extracting salt from a natural alt pan to the north and preserving their catches
				making guanaco- and-seal-skin coats
				the ships got extensive maintenance
					they were unloaded
						during unloading it was realized that they had only 6 months of supplies, not 1.5 years as they had purchased
							Morison says it was from the Sevillians; Bergreen says Canaries...
							"an ingenious method of fraudulent accounting..." find out more details
					even the ballast was removed and cleaned
					
1520 May  3 Santiago under Serrano to scout for the Strait and/or provisions

1520 May 22 Santiago runs aground 3 leagues south of Rio Santa Cruz; all but one men jumped off; the ship was pulled out to sea and run aground again
				Morison doesn't specifically mention her breaking up, Bergreen i think does...
		    2 men are sent north to walk (Bergreen "24 leagues") to Puerto San Julian 
		    	They construct a raft out of Santiago's timbers to cross the river
				They walk north 11 days in the cold with little to eat (ferns and roots, no luck hunting...)
					"The path was rough and full of thorns"
					No fresh water, they resorted to melting snow
					How would these men sleep?
					They were unrecognizably gaunt when they arrived
				They successfully inform Magellan's men; afraid of losing another ship sends a rescue party south overland with supplies to retrieve the crew
			Horrible ordeal, but everyone survived(!)
			Bergreen explains it best p.155-159

1520 Jun?   The wreck and rescue of the Santiago rattles Magellan deeply because it becomes more clear how dangerous the mission is; he reassigns captains to those most loyal to him: Mesquita stays with San Antonio, Duarte Barbosa to Victoria, Serrano to Concepcion

1520 Jun?   First Patagonian seen
            Gave him rosary beads, tinkly hawks' bells, a comb and a mirror
			"The poor savage was so terrified at seeing his hairy mug in the mirror that he recoiled, knocking down, as he did so, four little Spaniards."
			"Other natives turned up with their tame guanaco and their beasts of burden -- the women."
			"The men, to amuse the Spaniards, performed a primitive version of the old sword-swallowing trick, shoving arrows down their gullets and drawing them out without hurt."
			18 Patagonians were entertained on board the ships
				1 stayed on the ship for a week, allowed himself to be christened Juan, and learned to say 'Jesu, Ave Maria'. He ate all the mice and rats tat were caught on board, and left clothed and apparently happy. But he never turned up again.
			This story tells us:
				Gives us a hint at the mass conversions that will happen later
				At this point Magelan's men still throw away rodents
1520 Jul 28 4 natives appeared and Magellan kidnapped 2 via a trick; he heaped their cupped hands with trading truck, then slapped pairs of leg irons on 2 of them. The natives like them at first until they realized they were tricked
			Bergreen p.167-168

1520 Aug 11 Juan de Cartagena and Pero Sanchez de la Reina marooned on a small island in sight of the ships
			No: lifeboat, firewood, scant clothing
			Yes: bread and wine for the summer
1520 Aug 24 Armada de Molucca weighs anchor
			"The two condemned men kneeled at the water's edge, crying and pleading for mercy as the ships grew smaller and finally vanished over the horizon." -- Bergreen p.171

1520 Oct 11 Eclipse of the sun
1520 Oct 18 Magellan risks the open sea
1520 Oct 21 Discovery of the 'Cape of the Eleven Thousand Virgins' @ 52 lat, 52.5 long
			As 21 October is the feast day of Saint Ursula and the Eleven Thousand Virgins, he named the cape in their honor.
            setting: Straight of Magellan, Tierre del Fuego
			They call it "Strait of All Saints"

1520 Oct 28 tied up at island (either Elizabeth Island or Dawson Island)

1520 Oct 28+San Antonio entered Magdalen Sound
1520 Nov 3? San Antonio fails to reappear 6 days later -- San Antonio had mutinied
            Magellan suspects mutiny
			San Antonio was the largest ship and carried many of the fleet's provisions in her hold

1520 Nov 21 Magellan dictates a letter for Barbosa on Victora
			They press on

1520 Nov 28 Fleet reaches the Pacific!
			Magellan calls it Cape Desire (now Cape Froward) because of his long desire and 2 year odyssey seeking it!
			3 ships left (Trinidad:Magellan, Concepcion:Serrano, Victoria:Barbosa), ~200 men
			They head north up the coast of (now) Chile

1520 Dec  1 Albo: "morning we saw bits of land like hillocks"
1520 Dec 18 Between Santiago, Chile and Juan Fernandez islands finally change course headed West
			setting: ships, Pacific ocean (especially the South Equatorial current)
1520/1 Dec/Jan Pacific was calm, winds were strong, they made excellent time
			"for hours on end the waves slapped rhythmically against the hulls, the sails sighed and swelled contentedly in their fittings and seamen spent their idle hours playing card games or sleeping." -- Bergreen, p.209
			Pigafetta spends time translating the willing Patagonian's language
				he introduces him to Christianity
				Patagonian began to weaken and fall ill
				he was baptized and christened Paul
				he died shortly thereafter, "presumably he was given a proper burial at sea." -- Bergreen, p.211
				related: The Tempest: "Caliban" was partly inspired by Pigafetta's account of the Patagonian
			Pigafetta studies birds
			they threaded their way past many islands without ever seeing them
				related: Kon-Tiki
			Food situation becomes bad, scurvy begins to strike the crew
				"Thirst and hunger tormented the crew. The seals they had butchered and salted in Patagonia turned putrid and became infested with maggots, which devoured the sails, rigging and even the sailors' clothing, rendering them all useless..." -- Bergreen, p.214
				"The rats commanded a premium because sailors believed that eating them might offer protection against the disease they all feared: scurvy" -- Bergreen, p.214
			Pigafetta:
				We were 3 months and 20 days w/o any fresh food. We ate biscuits which were no longer
				biscuit, but powder of biscuit swarming with worms, for they had eaten the good.
				It stank strongly of the urine of rats.
				We drank yellow water that had been putrified for many days.
				We also ate ox hides that covered the top of the mainyard to prevent the yard from chafing
				the shrouds, and which had become exceedingly hard because of the sun, rain and wind.
				We left them in the sea for 4-5 days, and then placed them for a few moments on top of
				the embers, and so ate them; and often we ate sawdust from boards. Rats were sold for
				one half ducado apiece, and even then we could not get them.
			Burials at sea commonplace once scruvy begins
			Pigafetta counts 29 dead from scurvy

1521 Jan 24 "San Pablo" atoll (now Puka Puka) sighted
			Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul
1521 Feb  4 Caroline Island spotted
				couldn't anchor, bottom couldn't be found

1521 Feb 13 cross the equator

1521 Mar  6 reach Guam "The Island of the Thieves"
			natives steal boat
			Magellan's men retaliate by killing 8 men
				...then they realize the futility and stupidity of their actions
1521 Mar  9 depart Guam

1521 Mar 13 sight Samar

1521 Mar 18 "they saw a boat bearing 9 men approach from the direction of Suluan"
1521 Mar 19 Good Friday: sent Enrique ashore on Limasawa
1521 Mar 20 
1521 Apr  8?Magellan goes to Cebu
			Pigafetta and other sleep with native music girls
			Pigafetta fascinated by palang
1521 Apr  9 
1521 Apr 10 2 men die from scurvy
1521 Apr 14 King Humabon is baptized
			Other islanders join in... 2,200 baptized(!)
1521 mid-Apr "Magellan's trajectory had reached its zenith" -- Bergreen, p.272
			Magellan vows to baptize all islanders, by force if necessary
1521 Apr  ? Mactan village burned
1521 Apr 26 Mactan chief Sula brings offering of goats to Magellan, blames Lapu Lapu
			Lapu Lapu stubbornly resisted conversion to Christianity
			Sula offers his soldiers, Magellan decides to engage Lapu Lapu's men alone(!)
			Magellan's men try to convince him not to involve himself in the native's fights
				Magellan concedes to reduce men and keep ships far from shore

1521 Apr 27 midnight: 60 set out, including Magellan, Pigafetta, Enrique, Magellan's son, Cristovao Rebelo, Cebuians in their own small boats
			They arrive at Mactan 3 hours before dawn
			Magellan sends a message to Lapu Lapu; he refuses and stalls for time by asking Magellan to delay his attack, this baffles Magellan
			Magellan orders an attack as the sky begins to glow with approaching dawn
			~50 men wade in armor 1/2 mile of sandbar towards shore
			~1500 Mactanese show up on shore
			Magellan killed
			"After the furious battle ended, the hacked pieces of the explorer's corpse drifted aimlessly in the water near the beach at Mactan until the victorious warriors claimed them." -- Bergreen, p.286
			more: Bergreen, p.277-287

			the survivors held an election to select the next admiral
			Enrique and (Barbosa or Serrano) argue, Enrique, furious, leaves the ship
			Enrique plots with Humabon and returns

1521 May  1 Enrique invites the Aramada's leaders to a feast on behalf of Humabon; 30 men accept
			Pigafetta nurses a poison arrow wound and does not attend
			Soon, Joao Lopes de Carvalho and Gonzalo Gomez de Espinosa return unexpectedly
				they had seen Father Valderrama entering a Cebuan hut which made them nervous
			They suddenly hear "great cries and groans", and raise anchor to approach
				they see armed Cebuans kill 27 of the man, taking Serrano and the priest hostage
				a few men escape and swim to the ship
				the cables are cut and set sail immediately, as Cebuans eat the dead and launching ships
				they bring the hostages to shore where they call for the men, promising to exchange them for ransom
					the Armada negotiates with the Cebuans, sending them an iron gun
					the Cebuans ask for another iron gun
					they send another
					the Cebuans ask for another iron gun
					they realize that it will never end
				the Armada abandons the hostages, and Serrano pleads for their help and curses them
				the men on the ship shout to Serrano and they shout back
				the ships weigh anchor and set sail
				115 men remain

1521 May  2 Concepcion is burned
				Elcano claims its hull is infested with shipworms

1521 May  6 San Antonio arrives in Seville
			King Charles wants the money back, but there's nothing of value left
				Charles is otherwise busy with political turmoil and does not comment on the mutiny
1521 May  6+53 of the 55 mutineers give depositions at the Casa de Contratacion
				They tell exaggerations and outright lies to cover themselves
1521 May 26 Archbishop Fonseca delivers response to the depositions
			The mutineers go free
			Mesquita is jailed
			Casa cuts of Beatriz's financial resources and places her under house arrest

1521 Sep?   Full inquiry of San Antonio mutiny completed after 6 months
			Diogo Barbosa bullied out of property Magellan had given to him

1521 Jul  9 

1521 Jul  9 

1521 Jul 29 Brunei

1521 Nov  8 Tridore/Ternate

1521 Dec 21 Victoria leaves Spice Islands


1521 Jan 28 Charles V presides over the Diet of Worms

1521 Feb 11 Victoria leaves Timor

1521 ?      Magellan's wife Dona Beatriz dies ("broken heart")
1521 May 25 The Edict of Worms by Emperor Charles V declares Luther a heretic and outlaw for his Ninety-Five theses and offering a reward for his capture.
1521 Dec 13 King Manuel I dies in Lisbon, Kingdom of Portugal at age 52

1522 Jan 25 Victoria arrives at Timor

1522 Mar 18 

1522 Jul  9 Victoria anchors in Verde Islands


1523        Fonseca clashed with Hernan Cortés, conqueror of Mexico, which led to his removal from office in 1523, the year before his death. Over his long career Fonseca inevitably made many enemies, most notably Bartolomé de las Casas, known as the Defender of the Indians, who denounced him for his indifference to the cruelties that Spanish settlers inflicted on the native population of the new lands. 


